.TH VAS-CLEANUP 8 "2026-05-30" "vx-dga-l-vas" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
vas-cleanup \- Interactive lifecycle tool for the VAS inventory
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vas-cleanup
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vas-cleanup
is an interactive utility that triggers client lifecycle transitions in
.BR vas (8)
without restarting the service.
It reads the same configuration as
.B vas
and connects to the running SQLite database directly.
.PP
The interface adapts to the available terminal:
Zenity (graphical desktop), dialog (ncurses terminal), or plain text menu
(any terminal).
.SH OPERATIONS
.TP
.B Mark inactive
Transitions
.B active
clients that have not sent a heartbeat within the specified duration to
.BR inactive .
This bumps the inventory version so consumers detect the change.
.TP
.B Archive
Transitions
.B inactive
clients that have not sent a heartbeat within the specified duration to
.BR archived .
Non-destructive; the record is retained.
.TP
.B Purge
Permanently deletes
.B archived
clients that have not sent a heartbeat within the specified duration.
This operation is irreversible.
.TP
.B Full cycle
Runs mark-inactive, archive, and purge in sequence using the durations
configured in
.IR /etc/vas/vas.conf .
.SH DURATION FORMAT
Each operation asks for an inactivity threshold. Accepted formats:
.PP
.RS
.nf
30d   \(em 30 days
12h   \(em 12 hours
90m   \(em 90 minutes
60s   \(em 60 seconds
.fi
.RE
.PP
If no unit suffix is provided a warning is issued and days are assumed.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/vas/vas.conf
Configuration file (same as
.BR vas (8)).
.TP
.I /var/lib/vas/vas.db
SQLite database operated on directly.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR vas (8)
.SH AUTHOR
Gabriel Navia <correos@gabrielnav.es>
