.TH VAS 8 "2026-05-30" "versatile-autoreg-vas" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
vas \- Versatile Autoregistration Server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vas
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vas
is a lightweight HTTP REST server that maintains a real-time network
inventory of registered equipment.
It stores each client's hostname, IP address, MAC address, last-seen
timestamp, and two extensible extra-field dictionaries in a SQLite database.
.PP
Clients register and send heartbeats using
.BR vac (8).
Consumers such as
.BR val (8)
poll the version endpoint to detect changes and retrieve the filtered
inventory.
.SH CLIENT LIFECYCLE
Each registered client transitions through the following states:
.TP
.B active
The client is registering or sending heartbeats normally.
.TP
.B inactive
No heartbeat received within
.BR TTL_INACTIVE .
The version is bumped so consumers detect the change.
.TP
.B archived
No heartbeat received within
.BR TTL_ARCHIVE .
The record is retained for historical reference.
.TP
.B (purged)
Definitively deleted after
.BR TTL_PURGE .
Set
.B TTL_PURGE=0d
to disable permanent deletion.
.PP
A client in
.B inactive
or
.B archived
state is automatically reactivated upon the next
.B POST /register
or
.B POST /heartbeat
request.
.SH API ENDPOINTS
.TP
.B POST /register
Register or update a client. Bumps the version if data or status changed.
Returns
.BR {"status":"ok","version":"..."} .
.TP
.B POST /heartbeat
Lightweight liveness update. Only touches
.IR last_seen .
Returns 404 if the UUID is unknown (client must re-register).
.TP
.B GET /health
Returns
.B {"status":"ok"}
with no side-effects. Intended for reverse proxies and monitoring.
.TP
.B GET /version
Returns the current inventory version as a numeric timestamp
.RI ( YYYYMMDDHHMMSSmmm ).
.TP
.B GET /clients
Returns the client list filtered by
.B ?status=
.RI ( active | inactive | archived | all ,
default
.BR active )
and optionally by
.B ?extra_key=
.IR key .
.TP
.BI "GET /clients/" uuid
Returns the full record of a single client including its UUID.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B vas
reads
.I /etc/vas/vas.conf
and all
.B *.conf
overlays in
.IR /etc/vas/vas.conf.d/ .
.PP
Key configuration variables:
.TP
.B PORT
TCP port to listen on (default:
.BR 8000 ).
.TP
.B DB_PATH
Path to the SQLite database (default:
.IR /var/lib/vas/vas.db ).
.TP
.B TTL_INACTIVE
Time without heartbeat before marking a client inactive (default:
.BR 30d ).
Accepts suffixes:
.BR d ,
.BR h ,
.BR m ,
.BR s .
.TP
.B TTL_ARCHIVE
Time without heartbeat before archiving an inactive client (default:
.BR 90d ).
.TP
.B TTL_PURGE
Time without heartbeat before permanently deleting an archived client
(default:
.BR 365d ;
.B 0d
= never).
.TP
.B LIFECYCLE_INTERVAL
How often the lifecycle transitions are re-evaluated (default:
.BR 24h ).
.TP
.B HOOKS_DIR
Directory of scripts executed (fire-and-forget) after each version bump
(default:
.IR /etc/vas/hooks.d ).
.TP
.B LOG_LEVEL
Log verbosity:
.B no
|
.B normal
|
.B debug
(default:
.BR normal ).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/vas/vas.conf
Main configuration file.
.TP
.I /etc/vas/vas.conf.d/
Drop-in configuration overlays, applied in lexical order.
.TP
.I /etc/vas/hooks.d/
Hook scripts executed after each inventory version bump.
.TP
.I /var/lib/vas/vas.db
SQLite database containing the client inventory.
.TP
.I /var/lib/vas/version
Plain-text file with the current inventory version.
.TP
.I /usr/share/vas/vas.conf.defaults
Reference copy of all configuration variables with documentation.
.TP
.I /usr/share/vas/hooks.d.examples/val-local
Example hook that sends UDP push notifications to VAL-Aware listeners.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR vas-cleanup (8),
.BR vac (8),
.BR val (8),
.BR systemctl (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Gabriel Navia <correos@gabrielnav.es>
